---
title: "Let Me Get My Ideas Out"
description: "Kanye West appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live, ostensibly to squash the Twitter beef. Kimmel joked about tweeting from the toilet, saying that's where he thinks of \"the best shit\" But a visible transformat..."
date: "2013-10-10"
author: "Eric Harvey"
source: "Pitchfork"
summary: "Kanye West appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live, ostensibly to squash the Twitter beef. Kimmel joked about tweeting from the toilet, saying that's where he thinks of \"the best shit\" But a visible transformation happened during the interview’s second segment. \"I’ve got ideas that could mean something if I could put the proper production around them,\" he said."
draft: false
---

# Let Me Get My Ideas Out

## Why Kanye West Is Still Speaking Through the Wire

Last night Kanye West appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live, ostensibly to squash the Twitter beef that Kanye instigated a few weeks ago, after a skit in which Kimmel reimagined a typically passionate Kanye interview as the ramblings of a milkshake-sipping child. The two engaged amicably for the first ten minutes of last night's interview, and Kanye even gamely joked about tweeting from the toilet, saying that’s where he thinks of "the best shit."

But a visible transformation happened during the interview’s second segment. After Kimmel jokingly presented his guest with a child-sized pair of leather jogging pants—the butt of his original joke—Kanye smartly replied, "Fashion isn’t always practical. It’s more about emotion, it’s more about swag." That statement that could apply just as well to his music, but once Kanye starts talking about his inability to fully infiltrate the world of high fashion (he's revealed that "Black Skinhead" and "I Am A God" were both written after he was slighted by Saint Laurent designer Hedi Slimane), he gets undeniably worked up. "What I was trying to express in the Zane interview… I know I’m a hip-hop, I’m a rapper and everything," he said to Kimmel, "But I’ve got ideas that could mean something if I could put the proper production around them."

From that moment of the interview on, I found myself really rooting for Kanye. Not so much because I have any cards in the fashion game, but because he took the opportunity to patiently reiterate a few things he’d already said in the BBC interview (not to mention the lyrics to "New Slaves"): A black artist breaking into the world of high European runway fashion is a political act, on par with Michael Jackson breaking through MTV’s race barrier with Thriller. Kanye has long recognized the connection between music and fashion, and the self-proclaimed "Louis Vuitton Don" who brought preppy style to hip-hop in 2004 has tried on many occasions to elucidate it. Most people, including Kimmel and his noticably silent audience, just weren’t listening.

At this point, Kanye is used to not being heard. In fact, his entire career has been shaped by a series of instances in which he pushed against various boundaries to communicate something. Think of his 2003 debut single "Through the Wire", which featured West rapping with his jaw wired shut just two weeks after a near-fatal 2002 car accident. Then on September 2, 2005, standing alongside a terrified Mike Myers, West gave voice to countless displaced black victims of Hurricane Katrina, pushing past the institutionalized boundaries of decorum dicatated by a concert telethon and boldly stating seven words that no one ever thought they’d hear uttered on TV about a sitting president. Even 8 years later, you can see Kanye pushing past his nervousness, driven by the force of his convictions. Five years later, when Matt Lauer and the Today Show asked West to apologize to President Bush, he admitted, "I believe that in a situation of high emotion like that, we as human beings don't always choose the right words."

Heightened emotion and hard-pressed elocution have shaped much of West’s career and public persona. Last night's quote about his confidence in his fashion ideas reminded me of a lyric from the Late Registration track "Gone": "I'm ahead of my time, sometimes years out/ So the powers that be won't let me get my ideas out/ And that make me wanna get my advance out/ And move to Oklahoma and just live at my aunt's house." But Kanye never runs away—quite the opposite. There's the 2009 VMAs, when he stormed the stage, ad-libbing an institutional critique with strong racial dimensions. Or on 808s and Heartbreak, on which he purposefully twisted his vocals into unrecognizable shapes by turning the Auto-Tune to 11, and foregrounding the acknowledged limitations of his own singing abilities. The album's dark themes and grotesque electronic production reflected his anguish at his mother’s death, and anger at a recent breakup. When he wanted to escape the limelight but remain within it, he simply allowed Twitter to speak for him, casting into sharp relief like no celebrity before him the false intimacy provided by this particular medium.

Kanye’s decade-long solo career has been a struggle between the non-stop ideas running through his brain and his skills at verbalizing them through a variety of communication obstacles, whether self-created or forced upon him. In this light, it’s completely understandable that a man so bent on being understood would be furious to hear his words revoiced by a child. Yes, that skit was a dumb joke and we probably shouldn’t expect much more from an ex-morning radio jock like Jimmy Kimmel. But as Kimmel himself reminded us last night, it’s not the only time he’s re-voiced West.

Before the interview, Kimmel re-aired a skit from a few years back in which Josh Groban "sang" some of Kanye’s tweets. Yes, part of the humor obviously comes from the awkward translation from tweet (something meant to be read) to songs (something meant to be heard), and Kanye seemed cool about it last night. But if Kanye got mad about a white singer humorously reciting the words of a black guy, I wouldn’t blame him, in the same way that I wouldn’t blame rappers for getting angry at having their lyrics recited by dorky white guys speaking "proper" English. Translations like these are subtle power moves, in the same way that, as critic Ayesha A. Siddiqi pointed out, Kanye’s BBC interview was classified as a "rant" in subsequent discourse. As Kanye reminded us last night, being black and creatively edgy, in fashion or music, can be an uphill battle when it comes to being heard—and understood—on your own terms.
