---
title: "Top of the World"
description: "It’s Easy if You’re Kanye West. Here at Bulgari, gem provider to the stars, wall-borne cases of diamonds are blazing so hard you can almost hear them “bling” Flat-screens are playing the James Bond cl..."
date: "2005-09-01"
author: "Chris Norris"
source: "Blender"
summary: "It’s Easy if You’re Kanye West. Here at Bulgari, gem provider to the stars, wall-borne cases of diamonds are blazing so hard you can almost hear them “bling” Flat-screens are playing the James Bond classic *Diamonds Are Forever*, the bar is pouring Mot. The place is a panorama of multi-culti pulchritude rarely seen outside a million-dollar rap video."
draft: false
---

# Top of the World

## So, What Does It Take to Top Blenders Hot 100? First, Record a Once-in-a-Lifetime, Legend-Making Hip-Hop Masterpiece. Then, Do It Again. It’s Easy if You’re Kanye West.

Guess the word is out about diamonds and girls. Here at the Manhattan headquarters of Bulgari, gem provider to the stars, wall-borne cases of diamonds, emeralds, and other pricey rocks are blazing so hard you can almost hear them “bling.” Flat-screens are playing the James Bond classic *Diamonds Are Forever*, the bar is pouring Moët, and the place is a panorama of multi-culti pulchritude rarely seen outside a million-dollar rap video. They’re everywhere, these stunners. Five-inch heels. Long, caramel-colored legs. Faces like feline sculptures. Bodies — to paraphrase Mya — like, whoa.

Years ago, rap scenes tended to be “ghetto fabulous,” or perhaps “jiggy,” but the prevailing vibe here tonight is something more easefully confident, less nouveau riche — though still plenty riche. Giant vases hold white roses and orchids, waiters bear haute-cuisine sweet potatoes, and on the second floor, five members of the String Orchestra of New York City are playing the collected works of the 21st-century American composer Kanye West, who tonight turns 28.

“This is me trying to become more comfortable with the position I’m in,” West says of his immediate goals. “The last album was groundbreaking. Now the process is to strive for greatness.” Well, greatness shouldn’t be too tough. Last year, West sold 3 million copies of his debut record, *The College Dropout*, which united the celebratory decadence of hip-hop’s current pop face with the gritty social consciousness that marked its past. The CD made West a cultural superstar — one of *Time* magazine’s most influential people in the world — and helped resuscitate hip-hop itself.

So given all that, you can’t blame the guy for taking some time out tonight to smell the roses — and collect more praise. Near the glass front doors, a large easel bears a giant white card proclaiming “Happy 28th Birthday Kanye.” As the dignitaries enter, they tag up. “Happy Mutherfucking Birthday” reads one handwritten entry. “To a fellow Gemini and true inspiration to us all,” reads another (signed by industry kingpin L.A. Reid). A mini Hiroshima of flashes erupts outside and in step some men in pinstripes, seersucker, and Karl Lagerfeld shades, escorting several long, mocha-colored drinks of water in cocktail sheaths and stilettos.

One particularly striking woman enters, her glittering necklace, gold suit, and regal sweep suggesting she could buy the place. She glances around, goes to the card, and signs, “Happy birthday, Kanye,” she writes, “Love, Mom.”

***

Whoever said he wouldn’t make it past 25 has mad egg on his face, ‘cause Kanye West is way, way alive — in every city and ‘burb, mall and dale, his telltale production style (featuring sped-up vintage R&B bites and cinematic orchestration) now more or less the computer-inside standard for anyone who wants a hit. Suitors have ranged from gangstas like The Game and Scarface to R&B singers Janet Jackson and Alicia Keys to pop divas Britney Spears and Mariah Carey to hip-hop heroes Common, Cam’ron, Ludacris, Twista, and, of course, Kanye’s capo at Roc-A-Fella Records, Jay-Z, who used West’s beats to Godzilla-stomp every would-be alpha-rapper in the world.

And that’s just the beats. Last year, West himself emerged as a uniquely honest and conflicted rap star, dressed down in post-Tiger Woods chic, sharing his own vision of non-gangsta workaday folk in a lavishly produced, spectacularly well-conceived Everyman manifesto. He rapped about materialism, spirituality, and working at the Gap with such engaging wit and balls-out passion that the record became the Grammy-winning, critic-poll-topping, smash-hit post-hip-hop opus of the year. “Opus” being a term West would endorse only if “masterpiece,” “colossus,” and “epochal world event” were already taken.

“I won’t put music out unless I can talk my shit,” West says of his rep for generous self-appraisal. “I mean, how would you have Kanye come out and hold his head down? Are you serious? Kan-ye? The Ali of this shit?”

Indeed, Muhammad Ali has nothing on the Chicago-born rap star, who has spent the past year busily filling magazines and TV spots with a collection of ever more jaw-dropping soundbites. “Anybody who ain’t respecting me as an artist now might as well bash their heads into the wall for being stupid,” he advised one website. He suggested hip-hop magazine *The Source* amend *The College Dropout*’s four-and-a-half-mics score by reviewing his album’s remastered version

. (“It’s a different album. Give me my five mics.”) And, after losing to Gretchen Wilson for best new artist at 2004’s American Music Awards, West hit the pressroom to graciously concede, “I was the best new artist this year, so get that other bullshit out of here.”

But now, as we join West in a tan SUV making its way down Manhattan and towards New Jersey’s Giants Stadium for Hot 97’s Summer Jam concert, the man hardly seems the blowhard Citizen Kane one might expect. He smiles easily, laughs a lot, and does quite an excellent Brain — the cartoon genius lab rat from *Pinky and the Brain*. “Yes,” he drones, staring off into the distance. “I TiVo rap videos so I can study them. To learn what steps to take to crush them all!”

The Brain has been through quite a few changes since blowing up with *The College Dropout*. He has moved from his native Chicago, taking homes in New York and Los Angeles, and acquired a white Mercedes CLS 55 AMG whose ignition he can trigger by remote. “One of my new tricks,” he says. But there’s a notable self-consciousness to West’s embrace of wealth, an apparent, post-*Behind the Music* irony about rock-star vanity. This much you’d expect from the guy whose last album frets so often about black culture’s materialism (including one song, “All Falls Down,” that was a riff on the spiritual costs of living on credit). “I think I’m gonna move to London,” West half-jokes as we head toward the Holland Tunnel. “Get a fake-ass British accent like Madonna.”

Instead of flossing, this type-A celeb has been busy working hard and trying to live better — exercising and dieting. “No carbs, no sugar,” he says. “But they let you cheat once a week. That’s so dope. Why don’t they make it that way with marriages — you know, cheat once a week?” He looks to his gorgeous female seatmate, Brooke. She smiles and shakes her head. His look is fresh, clean, and understated: white Gap V-neck T-shirt, spotless white vintage Adidas, Yves Saint Laurent jeans, a tan Members Only-style jacket by Bottega Veneta. His neatly goateed face, smashed after the car accident he mercilessly documented in his single “Through the Wire,” seems only the slightest bit puffy at the cheeks. His jewelry consists of but one earring, a white Chanel watch, and one gold neck chain. “Simpler is always better,” he says. “If you can express yourself simply, do it.”

But Summer Jam is not the place to risk low-balling fans. Over the years, the annual event has become a Hip-Hop State of the Union, MC battle zone, and pipeline to hip-hop’s hardcore national audience. It’s the event Jay-Z chose to launch his beef with Nas and Mobb Deep in 2001. It’s the event that The Game will use tonight to publicly sever ties with 50 Cent, ceremoniously tossing his G-Unit chain. The most closely followed live rap event in the East Coast, it is, to say the least, not a show you want to blow.

“Being that my album is not out right now, this set is mostly to have a good time with the fans, make them excited,” West says of his ambitions for the night. He has been hard at work completing his new album, *Late Registration*, second in his planned four-chapter anthology that will end with *Graduation* and *Good-Ass Job*, and his methodology bears little resemblance to hip-hop’s old-time, spontaneous, sampler-and-beatbox aesthetic. West labors over each line of his raps. “You should be able to spend time scrutinizing every line for the entire album,” he says, noting that his new single, “Diamonds From Sierra Leone,” scored him his second “Hip-Hop Quotable” citation in *The Source* (for “Take your diamonds and throw ‘em up like you’re bulimic”). Instead of looped instrumentals, West uses professionally wrought orchestrations, this time arranged by film composer Jon Brion, scorer of indie films *Magnolia* and *Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind*.

West’s unflagging quest for jeweler-honed perfection is, he says, an outgrowth of his behind-the-scenes route to the top. “When I was a beat-hustling producer I did what every producer does — Teddy Riley, Timbaland, Neptunes — they all say, ‘I wanna have the most shit on the radio at a single time.’ So I’d say, ‘I wanna have 10 songs in the top 10.’ I think I got up to six. But if I hadn’t set my goal as 10, then maybe I would have got less. It’s like Michael Jordan saying, ‘OK, I wanna hit 100 free-throws in a row.’”

Self-motivational mind-games may partially explain West’s press-baiting claims to greatness. A self-described rapper who gained fame as a producer, West may be such a global control freak that he envisions the entire life of his album, right down to the place it will hold in history books. When West lambastes the press for insufficiently high grades, it’s almost as if he’s dressing down a collaborator — like James Brown docking bandmates for onstage mistakes.

“Yeah!” West says when Blender floats this theory. “It’s like I was supposed to have five mics,” he says, “so that when I’m at a dinner party, I can reference my five mics in some kind of cocky joke. Like, ‘Well, you know, as someone who has five mics, or what have you… See, they messed up my dinner joke! Four and a half? That has no snap to it.”

Of course, another possibility is that half the time he’s kidding. I mention that Michael Jordan also tried things he wasn’t so great at — like baseball and golf.

“Yeah,” nods West, “but the hard part is just trying to find something that I’m not good at.”

***

We pull up to the concert’s staging area, the Sheraton Hotel, to find an odd cultural remix: Scores of young black men wearing giant platinum crucifixes and T-shirts saying HUSTLA, UNCLE MURDA and JESUS LOVES YOU mingling with Hasidic Jews in full Orthodox dress — the latter, presumably, in town for today’s Salute to Israel Parade in Manhattan.

We ask West if he gets nervous before these giant group shows. “A little bit,” he says, poring over a magazine in the backseat. But not to worry — he has a plan. “In front of 50,000 people you’re not gonna be like, ‘Uh, OK, let’s try, uh… track number 12. In C Minor.’”

Later, in the cavernous bowels of Giants Stadium, West and his small team, joined by collaborator and Chicago bud Common, prepare for the set. A lackey opens an alligator bag and hands over the heavy Roc-A-Fella chain. West slides it over his head and is ready to hit the stage. First, he calls his entourage into a circle to join hands for a quick prayer. Common, capped head bowed, kicks it: “Our father, God, Allah, we thank you for this moment in time,” he begins in his deep voice. “Bless Kanye, bless his album, take over his album and take it to the highest place possible.” He gives other praise and shout-outs, then closes, “In the name of Jesus, in the name of Allah and the spirit of our inner essence. Amen.”

Everyone says “Amen,” applauds, and files into the stadium to hear Ludacris booming, “How you ain’t gon’ fuck, bitch? I’m me!” The Atlanta rap star is tearing through his smash hit “Stand Up” — produced by Kanye West — after which West will take the stage. First, he’ll bring on Harlem street hero Cam’ron to perform the song “Down and Out” — with music by Kanye West — then Common, to perform his song “The Corner” — with music by Kanye West. Finally, the music cuts out, lights fade, and the beginning of “Diamonds From Sierra Leone” comes twinkling from the speakers.

The song began its life as a declaration of Roc-A-Fella’s continuing reign, diamonds being a symbol of the Roc — get it? But it accrued a kind of post-production political consciousness when West learned about Africa’s bloody diamond trade. “Q-Tip told me about it, and I checked out a documentary,” he reports. “So I changed the song title from ‘Diamonds’ to ‘Diamonds From Sierra Leone.’” He and director Hype Williams created a black-and-white video sending up the romantic imagery of De Beers diamond commercials and hired a Sierra Leone-born rapper to do the opening voiceover in regional patois. “Of course, we still got the main issue, about the rise, fall, and rebirth of Roc-A-Fella,” West says. “But it always seems to me like God has a bigger plan for my voice.”

Even so, tonight’s performance clearly emphasizes the song’s former theme. To this end, West has stacked the deck. As he raps the third verse, the beat drops out and West continues a cappella: “What’s up with you and Jay, man? Are y’all okay, man?” And then, seamlessly, without dropping a beat, a very familiar voice picks up the line on the loudspeakers: “They pray for the death of our dynasty like amen…” And that’s all anyone can hear before the shocked roar of 50,000 rap fans drowns all else out.

As an unannounced Jay-Z walks onstage in aviator shades, the noise is of a level that recalls reports from Shea Stadium 40 years ago, when the Beatles performed. As the song ends, West and Jay-Z stand stock still next to each other. The huge video screens fill with Jay’s stoneface. The crowd goes absolutely nuts. Jay takes off his sunglasses. The crowd goes even crazier. Surveying his realm, Jay-Z slowly rubs his mouth and puts his arm around Kanye. “No disrespect to anyone,” he announces at last. “But we RUN this.”

Five minutes after reclaiming the East Coast, West is in a van speeding back to Manhattan. “I feel like a spoiled kid,” he says of Jay-Z’s power-blessing. “Someone who’s got a little scooter hooked up to a generator that powers a city.” West says he would have talked some onstage shit about the poor souls doomed to follow him, but the next act was the Game — featuring music by Kanye West.

A FEW DAYS later, West is working the press — premiering some new tracks at a party at Manhattan’s Sony Studios. It’s a casual affair, with chatting, joking, and an open bar — a party that really jumps off with the album’s second single “Gold Digger,” its chorus featuring a convincing Ray Charles blues holler by Jamie Foxx. But a few songs later, midway through “Crack Music,” the music cuts out, leaving a moment of confused silence. “OK,” says West, strolling out among the drinkers and listeners with a microphone. “It took me a really long time to write this. All right? So I just want everybody to listen real closely…” Guests stare down at their drinks, embarrassed. They eye exit routes, wondering how to gracefully remove themselves from this sudden detention hall.

But as West continues to explain, he builds up a new momentum. He starts declaiming the verses of this new apparent protest song — “How we shot the Black Panthers… heroes and heroines got hooked on heroin.” He emphasizes each line, jabs the air to make his points, bobs to the beat in his head. In about 20 seconds, West — whose father, Ray West, was a Black Panther — reclaims the moment solely by force of his own infectious intensity, doing an impromptu, a cappella Kanye Unplugged. When he finishes, the crowd erupts in applause.

“I felt like it was God working through me to get this message out,” West says of the song. The party resumes. After a few jams, he cues up another new joint. “Just listen,” he tells the crowd. “Because the lyrics are very good.” Everyone laughs. “Hey, I’m serious,” he says. “I just got Rhyme of the Month!”

Donda West assures us her son is not kidding. “Oh, he’s totally serious,” she says, then laughs. As a child, West was both a prodigy and a ham — winning national art contests and tearing it up on karaoke jams at Disney World. “I remember in kindergarten his teacher told me, ‘Well, he certainly doesn’t have any problem with self-esteem, does he?’”

West is an only child (hence his first name, Ethiopian for “the only one”). Research shows that only children tend to have higher self-esteem and better relationships with parents, are often more verbally advanced, and are more likely to learn to do things by themselves. And now, 21 years after his Disney World tour de force, Kanye West seems very much true to form. We are back at Bulgari’s diamond paradise, which West has just entered. He comes in beaming, flashing the Roc’s diamond-shaped handsign. “What’s up, fam!” he calls to a partygoer.

Wearing a white shirt, tan linen suit, and white pointed shoes, West escorts Brooke, who’s rather next-level hot in a gold dress with parted cleavage vent. Kanye — “Ye” to his friends — hears a cheer every time someone says his name. He peruses the signatures on the board, poses for some photos. As he moves further into the lobby, the string quartet starts playing “Jesus Walks,” whose meaning, in this context, is rather alarmingly ambiguous.

Everyone’s here. There’s P. Diddy in pinstripes, pocket hankie, and shades. There’s natty man-about-town Farnsworth Bentley, in what looks like seersucker pajama bottoms. More and more people come over, each pressing up to pay their respects. Finally, after finding a tiny crack in the crowd, Blender sneaks in to get one last comment from West. We tell him that out of all the musicians in the land, Blender has chosen him as No. 1 of the Hot 100. Characteristically, West takes it in stride.

“Damn, that’s crazy,” says the crown prince, smiling and looking over his extended rap family. “It’s a lot of pressure,” he says, rubbing his chin. But he brightens, shakes our hand and assures us not to worry. “I’m ‘a go in and work,” he promises. “And I’m ‘a prove y’all right.”
