---
title: "Kanye West's High-Octane Ego"
description: "Kanye West sold nearly three million copies of his 2004 debut album, “The College Dropout” at the Grammys (where he cavorted onstage in angel wings), launching a line of diamond-encrusted Jesus head p..."
date: "2005-08-22"
author: "Sasha Frere-Jones"
source: "The New Yorker"
summary: "Kanye West sold nearly three million copies of his 2004 debut album, “The College Dropout” at the Grammys (where he cavorted onstage in angel wings), launching a line of diamond-encrusted Jesus head pendants. West, who is twenty-eight years old, made his name as a producer on Jay-Z’s 2001 album. He would sample a song by a well-known seventies band—the Jackson Five, say, or the Doors—speed up the track"
draft: false
---

# Kanye West's High-Octane Ego

There are few pop stars as consistently discontent and as obstreperously proud as the rapper and producer Kanye West. You might think that after selling nearly three million copies of his 2004 debut album, “The College Dropout,” winning three awards at the Grammys (where he cavorted onstage in angel wings), hearing Jay-Z, hip-hop’s paterfamilias, call him a “genius” in a rap song, and launching a line of diamond-encrusted Jesus head pendants, West would be feeling reasonably swell. But listening to his thrilling and frustrating new record, “Late Registration,” is a bit like being chauffeured around in the fanciest car you can imagine by a driver who won’t stop complaining about the mileage or the radio reception. You’re annoyed, but at the same time you don’t want the ride to end.

West, who is twenty-eight years old, made his name as a producer on Jay-Z’s 2001 album, “The Blueprint.” His style was gimmicky but distinctive. He would sample a song by a well-known seventies band—the Jackson Five, say, or the Doors—speed up the track until the singers squeaked, and reinforce the beat with a syncopated matrix of sampled drums. At a moment when hip-hop artists, driven largely by the increasing cost of licensing samples, were creating most of their songs from scratch with digital keyboards and drum machines, West’s taste for old records was appealing both to older hip-hop fans who weren’t ready to leave samples behind and to tourists who didn’t give a hoot about hip-hop but sure did like Motown. For the past four years, West has worked at a steady clip, producing songs for rappers like Talib Kweli and Beanie Sigel which were good enough to inspire hip-hop nerds to compile homemade mix tapes of his work.

But West was not satisfied with working behind the scenes; he wanted to perform. In 2002, after much begging and pleading—which he recounts in a bizarre eight-minute monologue at the end of “Dropout”—he persuaded Jay-Z to sign him to his Roc-A-Fella label as a rapper. His first hit was “Through the Wire,” for which he sampled a substantial chunk of Chaka Khan’s “Through the Fire,” and rapped about a near-fatal car accident he had been in. The song was recorded while West’s jaw was still wired partially shut, and it seems never to have occurred to him to wonder whether listeners would care to hear him mumble about his seat belt. In any case, the Chaka Khan sample carried the song onto the charts, and gave West an audience for his next hits, “Slow Jamz,” a comic jig about seducing a woman with R. & B., and “All Falls Down,” a laid-back soul tune that chronicles West’s uneasy relationship with celebrity: “I wanna act ballerific, like it’s all terrific. / I got a couple past due bills, I won’t get specific. / I got a problem with spending before I get it. / We all self-conscious, I’m just the first to admit it.”

As a lyricist, West seems mainly limited to two registers: self-mockery and self-regard—even as his musical interests have expanded. The sounds on “Late Registration” encompass decades of African-American music: gospel choirs, black-fraternity step-show chants, classic soul bass lines, and long, luxurious horn solos. On many of the songs, West collaborated with Jon Brion, who composed the scores for the movies “Magnolia” and “Punch-Drunk Love” and produced Fiona Apple’s last two records—including the remarkable, still unreleased album “Extraordinary Machine,” which has been circulating on the Internet this year.

Most rappers, however much they traffic in braggadocio, know the difference between their stats and their trash talk, between what they can deliver and what they pitch. West is a relentlessly clever, funny thinker, who throws away rhymes like “Before anybody wanted K. West’s beats, / me and my girl split the buffet at K.F.C.,” but as a rapper he is merely average. His breathy, needling voice can bring his punch lines down, and on “Late Registration” humor is too often supplanted by facile homilies like “Why everything that’s supposed to be bad make me feel so good?” It’s tempting to view his collaboration with Brion as further evidence of hubris—West’s way of boasting, “Look, I’ve got a trendy guest and big production values!” In fact, the pair make terrific music together. The track “Gone” begins with a sample of Otis Redding’s voice, from his song “It’s Too Late,” and bleeds into a two-chord piano ostinato, followed by a trim funk beat. Brion’s arrangement for strings—ten violins, four violas, and four cellos—creeps into the song in small staccato bursts, deferring to and reinforcing the beat. West is warming up by putting down his rivals: “What you rappers could get is a job from me. / Maybe you could be my intern. / An intern, I’ll show you how I cook up summer in the winter.” Then, after guest verses by the virtuosic New York rapper Cam’ron and West’s friend Consequence, the song suddenly decelerates into a spooky instrumental passage. When West takes over again, his ego is in high gear: “I’m ahead of my time, sometimes years out. / So the powers that be won’t let me get my ideas out. / And that makes me want to get my advance out. / And move to Oklahoma and just live at my aunt’s house.” As he raps, the string section breaks into an intricate counterpoint, following the rise and fall of his voice. The strings, pop’s dullest default bid for respectability, here work as hard as the m.c.

Brion adds a wonderfully honking keyboard to the end of “Gold Digger,” a cheeky rebuke to groupies that has been circulating on mix tapes for more than a month, and he helps West turn a banal sentiment—“Nothing’s ever promised tomorrow today”—into an addictive chorus on “Heard ‘Em Say,” which is sung in a sweet falsetto by Adam Levine, from Maroon 5, a parent-friendly pop band whose 2002 debut record sold four million copies. West’s titanic ambition almost guarantees the album’s several cornball misses, including “Hey Mama,” an unconvincing pledge of loyalty to West’s mother (a retired English professor), and “Bring Me Down,” a dopey ballad swollen with self-importance: “I have to say, since ‘Pac”—the rapper Tupac Shakur—“passed away, most of you rappers don’t even deserve a track from me.”

Nevertheless, West seems determined to be taken seriously, to show that he can tackle issues larger than himself. Take the album’s first single, “Diamonds from Sierra Leone,” a track built around Shirley Bassey’s 1971 James Bond theme, “Diamonds Are Forever.” In the original version of the song, which was released in May, West rapped about his disappointment over failing to win a trophy at the American Music Awards: “The only playa that got robbed and kept all his jewelry.” But what started as a characteristic fit of rock-star petulance quickly turned into self-reproach: “Who complain about what he is owed? And throw a tantrum like he is three years old?”

West’s critique didn’t end there. Apparently disturbed by reports of violence and exploitation in the African diamond trade, he made a video for the track that asked viewers not to buy “conflict diamonds.” Then, in June, West remixed the song, replacing the lyrics with verses that address the issue directly: “Over here, it’s the drug trade. We die from drugs. / Over there, they die from what we buy from drugs. . . . I thought my Jesus piece was so harmless, / till I seen a picture of a shorty armless, and here’s the conflict. / It’s in the black person’s soul, to rock that gold. / Spend your whole life tryin’ to get that ice. / On a polo rugby you look so nice. / How could something so wrong make me feel so right?” (He also commissioned thirty-two bars of verse from his boss, Jay-Z, who raps breezily but incongruously about other Roc-A-Fella musicians.) West doesn’t go into much detail about the gem business, but he is the only diamond-wearing rapper to acknowledge the cognitive dissonance of bling. And Bassey sounds gorgeously overblown on the track. Importing a Las Vegas belter to hip-hop is the kind of ballsy move that makes West almost as good as he claims to be.

It would be a mistake to make too much of West’s sudden pangs of social conscience. “Late Registration” succeeds, despite his self-involvement, largely because he is such a skillful entertainer. The album is divertingly odd, and it helps that West seems to know just how much preening his fans are likely to be able to tolerate. When, on the song “We Major,” he asks, “Can I talk my shit again?,” he is letting you know that he is aware of how full of it he can be. If West is the first to tell you how great he is, he is just as quick to tell you that he is simply insecure. Who doesn’t understand that?
