---
title: "Kanye West’s Argument With Himself"
description: "Kanye West was trying to finish his second CD, “Late Registration” in time for its new release date, Aug. 30. On average hip-hop track, the producer is the composer, responsible for all the music. A l..."
date: "2005-07-24"
author: "Kelefa Sanneh"
source: "New York Times"
summary: "Kanye West was trying to finish his second CD, “Late Registration” in time for its new release date, Aug. 30. On average hip-hop track, the producer is the composer, responsible for all the music. A lot of times, visiting a star in the studio is deadly dull because of the genre’s fairly strict division of labor. Some major rappers eventually become minor producers, too."
draft: false
---

# Kanye West’s Argument With Himself

If you had walked into the right Los Angeles recording studio sometime this past May, you would have been able to peer through a glass panel and watch Kanye West in a vocal booth, rapping. There was nothing unusual about that; he was trying to finish his second CD, “Late Registration,” which just might be this year’s most eagerly anticipated album in any genre.

But if you had been paying attention to the lyrics, you might have noticed something bizarre: there weren’t any. Or, at any rate, there weren’t enough. “I got na na da naa/ Da da can’t deny,” he rapped. He hadn’t finished writing the lyrics yet, but he already knew the meter and the general rhyme scheme. Now, all he had to do was work backward, from sound to sense.

A lot of times, visiting a hip-hop star in the studio is deadly dull because of the genre’s fairly strict division of labor. On your average hip-hop track, the producer is the composer, responsible for all the music. So rappers often go into the studio with a song that’s nearly finished; all they have to do is add lyrics, repeating them over and over until they come out cleanly. Some major rappers eventually become minor producers, too, like Eminem; a few years ago, he started making (and sometimes selling) his own spare, gloomy beats, which leave plenty of room for rhymes. Others, like Jay-Z, prefer to remain in the vocal booth (or, these days, the corporate boardroom), leaving the producing to the producers.

But since Mr. West excels at both rhyming and composing, watching him in the studio is like watching a man have a long discussion — sometimes an argument — with himself. He can go into the vocal booth and bend words or syllabic placeholders around the beat. Then, he can sit down at a sampler or keyboard and tweak the beat to match the words. He’s been doing both things this summer as he rushes to finish “Late Registration” in time for its new release date, Aug. 30. The disc was first announced for July 12, then pushed back to Aug. 16. Reached by phone a few days ago, he admitted he still wasn’t quite done. “I’m going to work on something till the last minute they give me,” he said.

Three years ago, Mr. West was known mainly as a hip-hop producer obsessed with 1970’s soul; rapping seemed almost like a hobby. His lyrics, available on self-released mix tapes, were appealing precisely because he seemed only half-serious. “We ain’t have to go coach, told you I’d be paid soon/ We ain’t gotta sit in this emergency aisle just to get legroom,” he rhymed, clumsily cramming in the extra syllables.

He seems amused when he’s reminded of that old couplet. “I wouldn’t do that now because I would have a skeleton, a pattern that I would stick to that sounds good with the beat,” he explained. “Adding words that mean something to that pattern, that’s my trick.”

Mr. West is now one of the best-known rappers in the country. He has sold more than two million copies of his debut album, “The College Dropout” (Roc-A-Fella/Island Def Jam), which was released last year and immediately sounded like a classic. He even has the accessory that every hip-hop star wants: coattails. His R&B protege, John Legend, has sold more than a million copies of his debut album, “Get Lifted” (Sony). And Mr. West oversaw “Be” (Sony), the new album by the veteran rapper (and fellow Chicagoan) Common. The disc earned rapturous (in fact, somewhat overheated) reviews and may well turn out to be Common’s best-selling album yet.

Now that he’s got a name, Mr. West also has an image and maybe even an image problem. Because his lyrics sometimes hint at social and political protest, he is often invoked as the answer to whatever is supposedly troubling hip-hop. (At Live 8 in Philadelphia, he rapped, “Drug dealer buys Jordans, crackhead buys crack/And George Bush gets paid off o’ all o’ that.”) And because his public appearances suggest that he doesn’t underrate his own music, he’s also known as a big-headed new star, the kind of sore winner who protests about not getting enough awards. In other words, he’s thought of as both a solution and a problem, which means he must be doing something right.

You can hear these competing currents in “Diamonds (From Sierra Leone),” the first single from “Late Registration” (Roc-a-Fella/Island Def Jam). Who but Mr. West would promote a new album with a song named in honor of the African victims of the diamond trade? And who but Mr. West would begin that song by rapping about his now-infamous tantrum at the American Music Awards? Recalling the night he lost the best-new-artist trophy to the country singer Gretchen Wilson, he rhymes: “I was sick about awards, could nobody cure me/ Only player that got robbed and kept all his jewelry/ Alicia Keys tried to talk some sense in him/ 30 minutes later, seen there’s no convincing him.”

One of the last songs he worked on for the new album was “Rose,” about seeing his ailing grandmother in hospital. It begins with a simple request: “I know it’s past visiting hours/ But can I please deliver these flowers?” After playing a rough version, Mr. West looked restless: he was plainly proud of his verses, which were unusually sparse, but the beat sounded slightly stilted. So began yet another conversation with himself.

What about a classic sample? An associate downloaded Taana Gardner’s 1981 disco hit “Heartbeat,” with a slow thumping beat that echoes the most memorable line in “Rose”: “You can feel my heartbeat, beat, beat.” Mr. West sampled the rhythm track and isolated the kick drum and the snare. Soon, “Rose” was playing again, and Mr. West had his own variation on the “Heartbeat” heartbeat. Was that it?

Apparently not. The next day, Rich Harrison, one of the leading R&B producers, stopped by, partly to talk to Mr. West about a remix of a hit by Amerie, Mr. Harrison’s protege. (Mr. Harrison is also the man who looped an old Chi-Lites record to create Beyonce’s “Crazy in Love.”) Inevitably, Mr. West drafted Mr. Harrison into service, and soon, the two men had formed a superproducer tag team. Mr. Harrison tapped a drum line into the sampler, and Mr. West liked what he heard — for a while, anyway.

But soon, he was back at it, and eventually, he hit upon a solution, slowing the rhythm down to half-speed so you could feel every backbeat and so the words sounded lonelier. “I’ve always been rhyming — that’s why I’ve always been a good producer,” he explained afterward. “I just wasn’t the greatest rapper. Now that I rap better, I make simpler tracks.”

Right now, the pop charts are dominated by mix-and-match collaborations, and albums are often made the same way. In some sense, Mr. West is bucking this trend: he often seems like a singular and self-sufficient star, a double-virtuoso who doesn’t need to collaborate with anyone besides himself. But because of his experience as a producer, Mr. West has learned how to invite lots of guests to his parties without letting them trash the place. “The College Dropout” had so many collaborators that they earned their own two-page spread in the CD booklet, which was wittily laid out as a high-school yearbook. (Mr. West gave himself two superlatives: best dressed and most unlikely to succeed.) But the album never felt like a grab bag. In fact, some fans probably still don’t know that “Jesus Walks” was partly written by an Indianapolis rapper named Rhymefest, who receives a discreet credit in the liner notes.

For “Late Registration,” Mr. West worked with everyone from the white Houston rapper PaulWall to the mellow producer and multi-instrumentalist Jon Brion, who is best known for overseeing albums by Aimee Mann and Fiona Apple. And judging from an early, unfinished version, the new album may show off Mr. West’s rhymes and stories even more effectively than its predecessor. He has perfected the art of tinkering with a project until it’s just right.

And then, as some exasperated Roc-A-Fella executives could surely tell you, tinkering some more. When he needed a video for “Jesus Walks,” the extraordinary gospel track that became one of his biggest hits, Mr. West commissioned three different videos (including one he directed himself), all of which received some airplay. In one of the videos, a Klansman re-enacts a station of the (burning) cross; in another, Jesus literally walks with the protagonist, even helping out with some instant grocery shopping. (One nod, Jeannie-like, and the fridge is full.)

Not surprisingly, the unveiling of “Late Registration” hasn’t gone smoothly. After he had recorded “Diamonds,” he learned about the conditions of diamond workers in Sierra Leone and elsewhere. He went back and retitled the track “Diamonds (From Sierra Leone)” and flew to Prague to shoot an apocalyptic video (with conflict diamonds a central, if mysterious, plot point). Then, the images in the video didn’t match the lyrics, so Mr. West recorded a new version of the track with a verse from Jay-Z; now, the popular remix doesn’t match the music in the video. A few days ago, Mr. West said he still wasn’t sure which version would wind up on the album. And now his record label is marketing a new single, a lighthearted track called “Gold Digger,” which includes a chorus by Jamie Foxx in Ray Charles mode.

“What’s weird,” Mr. West says, “is I keep working, but I keep finishing. Every day when I work at the studio, I finish the album. So if someone was like, ‘You’ve got to turn it in today,’ I would be confident turning it in today. But if they gave me another week, I would work for another week.”
