---
title: "The Kanye Cycle"
description: "The Kanye Cycle The danger in believing the rapper is serious about anything. It’s a Special Kind of Hell we live in when a celebrity who has admitted to never voting could claim to be running for pre..."
date: "2020-08-02"
author: "Craig Jenkins"
source: "New York"
summary: "The Kanye Cycle The danger in believing the rapper is serious about anything. It’s a Special Kind of Hell we live in when a celebrity who has admitted to never voting could claim to be running for president four months before the general election. There is a chance that seeing the president he once called a father figure enter a White House bunker to avoid George Floyd protesters was the impetus for all of this."
draft: false
---

# The Kanye Cycle

## The Danger in Believing the Rapper Is Serious About Anything.

It’s a Special Kind of Hell we live in when a celebrity who has admitted to never voting could claim to be running for president four months before the general election and catapult the internet into many days of trenchant debate about his motives for entering a race he had already lost. That’s the rarefied air occupied by Kanye West, one of the most famous people on the planet, and one of the least predictable figures in a sphere of American celebrities who move with careful intention, as defined by the strategic poise of megawatt stars like Taylor Swift and Beyoncé. West, by contrast, moves like summer rain: He sneaks up, empties out everything that’s been brewing upstairs, and moves on while we splash around in the puddles he leaves behind. After dividing his fandom by showing loud support for Donald Trump over the past four years, West backtracked during a peculiar Forbes interview earlier this month in which he insisted his maga years were an act of protest against “the segregation of votes in the Black community” and inspired in part by his admiration for the décor inside the Trump hotels. There is a chance that seeing the president he once called a father figure enter a White House bunker to avoid George Floyd protesters was the impetus for all of this; the retraction came with the caveat that West thinks Trump is “the closest president we’ve had in years to allowing God to still be part of the conversation.”

West is on the ballot in Oklahoma, and it’s unclear if he’ll be on it in any other states. But his run should have always been viewed with more suspicion than it has been, with filing deadlines in big-fish states like Texas already missed and crucial states like Florida, New York, Illinois, Pennsylvania, and Ohio requiring paperwork and tens of thousands of petitions to be signed and submitted. The talk didn’t die, because a popular musician and entrepreneur floating a White House bid was too irresistible a story to pass up, even when it was not his third or even fourth such announcement; because social media is a place that often values protracted thought processes more than commonsense conclusions (and some of that trickles down to the professional media because the press is obliged to cover what moves people). Perhaps it did seem funny onstage at the 2015 VMAs when West gave a rambling speech promising to run in 2020. But we didn’t have the backstory we do today: that his personal physician had put him on involuntary psychiatric hold in late 2016. Four years later, many of us in the audience and in the press still haven’t figured out how to deal with the auteur’s struggle with mental illness or the possibility that it animates his ideological choices.

West’s supposed run has been filled with theocratic political takes and ideas that never seemed deeply considered. In the Forbes profile alone, he said he planned to structure his administration after the fictional isolationist ethno-state of Wakanda, from Marvel’s Black Panther, and he insinuated that the pandemic is divine retribution for American godlessness and that the vaccine will be tantamount to the biblical mark of the beast. Then he suggested that Planned Parenthood and teen suicide are tools in a plot by the Christian Devil to dethrone God. Much of it is textbook conservative youth-pastor logic; there are plenty of precedents for the pro-life, pro– school-prayer, borderline–anti-vaxx character who believes disease is a method of humbling mankind that West seems to have pivoted to. Where is it coming from?

West is on good terms Jerry Falwell Jr., son of the prickly televangelist and president of Virginia’s Liberty University, which he refused to close even as covid-19 cases hit the state. He is also friendly with Joel Osteen and in January headlined Awaken 2020, an Arizona Christian conference featuring several controversial speakers. (To be fair, West’s personal pastor, Adam Tyson, and Michelle Tidball, the Wyoming therapist and life coach floated as his veep, seem mellow enough.)

Some of West’s proclamations were alarming, meandering, and impractical to a degree that invites comparison to his frenetic Life of Pablo days when it seemed clear that something was up but no one knew yet about his psychiatric emergency. The continuing press cycle fed into the old impression of West as a whimsical character with a tenuous grasp on the absurdity of some of his views, one famously played for yuks by shows like South Park through the years. It is an image that needs reform now that we know about his wellness journey. TMZ suggested the artist’s family is concerned about what could be a “bipolar episode.” The lack of context regarding his diagnosis (and the timing of his more grandiose statements) in coverage on the internet, which questioned the viability of the presidential bid but never entertained the possibility that the man might not be doing so well right now, illuminates our inability to step back and ponder the ethics of the internet content mill when the subject is a world-famous rapper prone to puzzling public remarks he later walks back.

As such, West, in all of his admitted political amateurishness and poignant lack of coherent plans for leadership, became the topic of a serious debate about the implications of a third-party candidate on the general election. Figures including the actress Debra Messing called his run a plot to filch young Black voters from Joe Biden and help Trump win again. It was a misunderstanding of the reasons Black voters would consolidate behind a centrist candidate—like, say, force of habit or Republicans’ inability to even seem to care about the issues plaguing the community—and of the way Black hip-hop heads view West in his Christian conservative years to treat it as an inevitability that people would march out in the middle of a pandemic to pull the trigger on a Kanye West presidency. It also took him at his word that he would see this thing through, falling into the common trap of sensationalizing another case of a billionaire spitballing fantastical plans for the future (the current billionaire in the White House notwithstanding).

The cycle continues: Kanye says a thing, we all go the long way to believing it, the idea proves untenable, and his sense that people are out to get him is reinforced while the belief persists that he is coolly orchestrating loud drama for financial gain. What if we’re wrong and what we saw as a promotional stunt was actually something much darker?

At some point, there needs to be a reckoning about the toxic relationship between West and the public, how he pokes at it, knowing it will overcorrect in response; how sometimes he stirs the pot a little to keep his name warm; how often it’s clear that he doesn’t even enjoy it. This month looked a lot like the old-school tabloid days when the eccentricities of figures like Michael Jackson were blown up and scandalized to provoke the inevitable gasps and guffaws from audiences ever hungry for fresh drama. That ended badly, and this one has dark potentiality.

This isn’t to say West wasn’t really planning to run for president or that his recent antics are some kind of veiled cry for help. But politics isn’t a medium you can storm on a whim, the way West approaches new music. It takes time or at least support from connections who have played the field. A late registration and a long-shot campaign are not in his best interests (or America’s). All of this ought to have colored the press coverage of West’s political endeavor. And when a subject has a history with bipolar disorder and addiction, it behooves the press to move more carefully if he appears to be neglecting his peace of mind. There’s a way to have talked about this bid without treating the subject like a circus bear and more fodder for giggles, gossip, and chatter. This month wasn’t it.

Read more at:https://www.magzter.com/stories/Lifestyle/New-York-magazine/The-Kanye-Cycle
