---
title: "Vh1 Storytellers"
description: "Kanye West's three-hour set had to be chopped to 90 minutes, including commercials. On record, it's all over in a little more than an hour. It's less storytelling and more golden age of entertainment-..."
date: "2010-12-12"
author: "Scott Plagenhoef"
source: "Pitchfork"
summary: "Kanye West's three-hour set had to be chopped to 90 minutes, including commercials. On record, it's all over in a little more than an hour. It's less storytelling and more golden age of entertainment-type stuff."
draft: false
---

# VH1 Storytellers

## This Live Set Finds Kanye Inserting Rambling Monologues in the Middle of His Songs, Not So Much Storytelling as a Bizarre String of WTF Asides.

The producers of "VH1 Storytellers" must have thought they'd struck gold when Kanye West agreed to appear on the program. He was already responsible for four (and soon to be five) of the most WTF/OMG live TV moments of the decade: crashing Justice at an awards show (Taylor Swift would come later), his "SNL" freestyle, his Grammys performance, and of course, the famed Hurricane Katrina benefit. But VH1 wound up with too much of a good thing, or too much of a jaw-dropping thing: West's three-hour set had to be chopped to 90 minutes, including commercials. On record, it's all over in a little more than an hour.

If you've ever seen Kanye live, you know what sort of stories he tells. There are no long intros explaining the hidden meanings of his songs, or where his life was at the time he wrote them. That would be unnecessary anyway, since his bio is already so entwined into his music. Instead, Kanye delivers monologues in the middle of songs. It's less storytelling and more golden age of entertainment-type stuff, like Sinatra or Garland holding court over an audience: Here's an anecdote, here's a joke, here are some inspirational words, here's what happens to be on my mind at this very moment. Dude should have had a highball in his hand. He was already wearing a bowtie.

Live, West is an entertainer and a perfectionist-- a bang-for-your-buck guy. Those at this taping presumably got their money's worth, but other than the few excised morsels that leaked after the show (a long anti-Radiohead screed and a defense of Chris Brown's attack on Rihanna), we don't know what was cut. Alas, those who pick up this record get an abbreviated, neutered version. I understand the impulse: The people behind the album aren't looking to entertain us; they're looking to create a salable product. (A need that no doubt caused this to be released more than a year after it was recorded-- they were still working 808s and Heartbreak back when this was taped.)

However it may have played in the room, breaking down a song in order to ramble doesn't make for a compelling at-home listen. The tracks here, from 808s in particular, are well chosen-- especially underrated ones like "Say You Will", "Robocop", and "Heartless"-- even if the album versions are vastly better. But hearing them here did make me think again about that record and hardened my belief that it will ultimately sit in West's catalog as respectfully as his first three LPs.

Really then, screw the songs. A better record-- albeit not a great product for those fronting the money-- would have been just the monologues. And why stop there? Why not about a best-of Kanye speaks: a Having Fun With Kanye on Stage, like the famous LP that collected clips of Elvis Presley talking at, rather than singing to, his audience. Hell, he's inching toward it already: 808s ended with "Pinocchio Song", a long monologue, and then he released this Storytellers disc. Remove the talking from each, balloon it to an unreasonable, audacious, bloated level, and you've got something worth hearing at least once.

Granted, the highlights there might have still been the highlights here: West grappling with his old homophobia; West again explaining how badly he wishes he could experience his own live show; and the part in "Amazing" in which we don't get to hear him defend Chris Brown. What we do get is him saying Michael Jackson and Michael Phelps are amazing, to audience approval, and then that O.J. Simpson is also amazing, to stunned silence. Live, this section was apparently more drawn out, but on record the edits create an unintentional WTF moment when you realize Phelps is there for his transgressions rather than his accomplishments: "Oh... he's equating a bong hit with allegations of child molestation and double homicide. Huh."

On the whole, this is another example of West trying something new, willing to risk looking foolish, and reacting to the twists of turns of his life in an honest way. It's what makes him equally refreshing and frustrating. Sure, when these impulses are channeled into his more reckless blog posts or stage crashes, it makes him look like an ass. I don't care about Swift's feelings any more than I cared about Justice's-- it was just some funny shit that makes West one of our only entertaining pop stars-- but picking on a teen girl was a breaking point in the court of public opinion, and if that affects his music, I ultimately care about that. In the end, I'd trade the sideline antics that bother people for a continuation of the serious winning streak this guy is on musically. It's possible, though, that you can't have the one without the other: Like he said in "Touch the Sky", his wrongs help him write songs. And his songs are awesome. Just not when they're broken up by long, one-sided conversations.
