---
title: "Kanye West’s Year of Breaking Bad"
description: "On Dec. 31, 2015, he released “Facts,” an out-of-nowhere harangue that insulted Nike. About a week later came “Real Friends,” as potent and dispiriting a catalog of loneliness he has ever recorded. Th..."
date: "2017-01-05"
author: "Jon Caramanica"
source: "New York Times"
summary: "On Dec. 31, 2015, he released “Facts,” an out-of-nowhere harangue that insulted Nike. About a week later came “Real Friends,” as potent and dispiriting a catalog of loneliness he has ever recorded. These songs set the stage for one of the most productive, disjointed and confusing years in the life of Kanye. It was one that began with him seeking grace, in the form of music, and ended that way "
draft: false
---

# Kanye West’s Year of Breaking Bad

Back at the beginning of 2016, Kanye West was already sounding alarms.

On Dec. 31, 2015, he released “Facts,” an out-of-nowhere harangue that insulted Nike, praised his wife’s business acumen and seemed to express sympathy for Bill Cosby. About a week later came “Real Friends,” as potent and dispiriting a catalog of loneliness he has ever recorded, a song about how fame warps and traps, and no matter how high it brings you, will always yank you down.

These songs set the stage for one of the most productive, disjointed and confusing years in the life of Kanye. It was one that began with him seeking grace, in the form of music, and also ended that way, but for very different reasons, following his hospitalization and his meeting with the president-elect, Donald J. Trump. And yet the Kanye of 12 months ago and the Kanye of today aren’t so far apart: instability, loneliness, a sense that he was being treated unfairly, a continuing quest to be heard. Mr. West may be facing severe public scrutiny, skepticism and concern, but even during this most challenging stretch, there are clear bridges to his old self.

In the last year, he has been busy. He released an album, “The Life of Pablo,” then continued to tweak it for a while in real time. He convened two runway collections of his Yeezy fashion line — one in Madison Square Garden, one in a park on Roosevelt Island. He had an art show in a Los Angeles gallery and teased a video game based on his mother’s journey to heaven. He sold merchandise in a few dozen pop-up shops around the world and released several iterations of his signature sneaker. And he performed dozens of nights of a tour that remade the proportions of arena concerts.

Though there were bumps along the way — the uncertain rollout of “Pablo,” the collapsing models (and shoe heels) at Roosevelt Island — the first nine months of the year were Mr. West firing on all pistons, and meeting with success.

But the final three months of 2016 spiraled well beyond his control. First came the robbery of his wife, Kim Kardashian, in Paris, a violent affair that included the theft of the 20-karat diamond engagement ring he gave her, worth a reported $4 million. That was followed by the disruption of his tour, and its eventual cancellation, following a couple of speeches in which he spoke admiringly of Mr. Trump; his involuntary admission to U.C.L.A. Medical Center hospital, followed by what will certainly be remembered as the most public crack of all: his meeting with Mr. Trump at Trump Tower on Dec. 13.

Rupture has long been the axis around which Mr. West’s career has turned — where most artists seek to create smooth narratives about themselves and get everyone else to play along, he instead prefers disruptive leaps, quick reframing and firebrand positioning. Stasis is his kryptonite.

The ruptures are typically intentional provocations, but not always: The period of deep trauma following the 2007 death of his mother remains one of Mr. West’s most vital, influential and least understood times. The last three months of 2016 figure to be another such stretch. Mr. West dyed his hair blond, then multiple colors. In paparazzi photos, and even in the holiday-party family picture he posted on Twitter, his eyes are somewhere far-off. Since his hospitalization, he has barely spoken publicly. When he and Mr. Trump descended to the Trump Tower lobby after their meeting, they were peppered with questions from the media, to which Mr. West replied only, “I just want to take a picture right now.”

Mr. West’s embrace of Mr. Trump, who spoke about black communities in cartoonish, inaccurate strokes (“They have no jobs, they have horrible education, they have no safety or security”), arrives at a particularly unlikely moment in his artistry. In 2013, he released “Yeezus,” an album full of industrial thump that featured some of his most acidic political commentary. It struck a confrontational tone that Mr. West carried through that year and the next.

By contrast, “The Life of Pablo” takes a turn to the ornate, the melodic and also the emotionally intimate. “Ultralight Beam,” the album opener, is a prayer. On songs like “Real Friends” and “No More Parties in LA,” Mr. West sounds exhausted and exasperated, while “I Love Kanye” is a withering self-assessment passed off as a taunt (“I miss the old Kanye”). And on “FML,” there was the specter of psychological instability, a possible foreshadowing of troubles to come: “You ain’t never seen nothing crazier,” he rapped, than him when he’s “off his Lexapro.”

The Saint Pablo tour, which began in August, took the worship elements of the album and rendered them literal. Each night, for a couple of hours, Mr. West performed while tethered to a platform that dangled over the crowd and moved from one end of the room to the other like a warship. The optics were bracing: Mr. West was both a god hovering over his subjects and a slave bound for their entertainment. Below him, chaos and thrill. Above him, klieg lighting that baked and beatified him. The approach was also a stark contrast to his last tour, following “Yeezus,” which became well-known for lengthy speeches that veered between motivation and tirade.

But in November, that impulse began to return. In San Jose, he said, “If I would’ve voted, I would’ve voted on Trump.” In Sacramento a few nights later, he spoke for about 15 minutes before leaving the stage having performed only three songs. The remainder of the tour was swiftly canceled, and a few days later, Mr. West was hospitalized, after the police were called to perform a welfare check after an episode at his personal trainer’s home.

Mr. West’s collapse was very public, but then again, even his private space is public: “My psychiatrist got kids that I inspired/First song they played for me was ’bout their friend that just died,” he rapped on “No More Parties in LA.” He still appears on his wife’s reality show, “Keeping Up With the Kardashians.” Plus, some of his most fascinating work last year — the video for the song “Famous,” and the ensuing art installation — was about the erosion of the public-private boundary.

In the clip for the song — which restoked the tension between him and Taylor Swift — doubles of him, his wife, Ms. Swift, Mr. Trump, Rihanna, Mr. Cosby and more celebrities all lay in an oversized bed, nude. It was an outrageous gesture of invasion, but it was also disarmingly tender — here were the famous, the powerful, the protected, shown in innocent, vulnerable slumber. It felt like a wish more than an attack.

How Mr. West interacts with other celebrities — fearlessly, stubbornly — continues to be one of his most powerful tools. During his Sacramento speech, he accused Beyoncé of negotiating her way to a video of the year award at the MTV Video Music Awards last year, and in October, lashed out at Jay Z, his longtime mentor, about the tensions between Apple Music and Tidal, and how the two men’s children “have never even played together.” In this way, Mr. West makes art of his peers, too.

That’s even more true of the younger generation. His most important mentor-mentee relationship is with Chance the Rapper, whose thumbprint is all over “The Life of Pablo.” (He also appeared on Chance’s “Coloring Book.”) Lil Yachty, the smiling hip-hop provocateur then still at the beginning of his ascent, was a model in the Yeezy Season 3 show at the Garden, as was a lackadaisical Young Thug.

But to some from an older generation — Mr. West’s elders, peers or his first wave of acolytes now grown up — Mr. West was floundering. Following Mr. West’s embrace of Mr. Trump, Talib Kweli posted a series of emotional appeals on Twitter: “we love u. u r everything u say u are. A genius, an icon. U added greatness to my life. But lifting Trump up kills us. Come home.” And in early December, J. Cole released “False Prophets,” a song that, while not using Mr. West’s name, appeared to be discussing Mr. West’s Icarus-like career path: “When he tell us he a genius but it’s clearer lately/It’s been hard for him to look into the mirror lately.” Sometimes the critiques came directly to Mr. West’s doorstep. During the Sacramento speech, Mr. West singled out Q-Tip: “I love you, bro. Don’t tell me how to be me, though.”

The low points of last year, whether a sign of deep trouble or just a momentary misalignment, have caused a radical shift in how Mr. West is publicly received. His weeklong hospitalization, and the presumed illness that led to it, rendered him more sympathetic to critics, but his support of Mr. Trump was, to some, unforgivable. (That his behavior can cause offense is something he is warming to: Three times last year, he used his Twitter for damage control, an unfamiliar position.)

Embracing Mr. Trump is perhaps the most consequential political act of an artist who, at a much earlier and less sure-footed stage of his career, in the wake of Hurricane Katrina risked his mainstream acceptance to make a bold accusation on a national telethon: “George Bush doesn’t care about black people.”

But he and Mr. Trump have parallels — both are vocal about those who they see as obstacles; both are steadfast in their self-belief. Perhaps Mr. West sees in Mr. Trump someone who freely speaks his mind and has been rewarded for it. During his speech at the Sacramento show, Mr. West referenced him as a sort of spirit guide: “Yeah, I’m taking his lead. I’ma just say how I say, be ‘Ye, and win.”

Read another way, Mr. West’s embrace of Mr. Trump — symbolic or otherwise — suggests an incipient nihilism at work. Rather than align himself with broader social causes — “I love being a voice of freedom when so many people are scared to speak up,” he wrote on Twitter in February — or the mainstream of black political thought, or even the politics of his wife, a supporter of Hillary Clinton, Mr. West’s unlikely shift suggests the maneuvers of someone who no longer believes in the systems that have previously nourished, sustained and inspired him — someone whose sense of safety has been revoked.

It should also be said, though, that Mr. West’s sympathy for the publicly maligned is as central to his personality as his self-regard. His outspokenness in favor of Mr. Trump wasn’t the first time he sided with a controversial figure — “Bill Cosby innocent!” he tweeted in February.

Bill Cosby, Donald Trump, Kanye West: highly visible stars with highly motivated antagonists. Mr. West may well perceive himself as still aligning with the persecuted, but the view from the top can be disorienting. It’s one thing to side with those who suffer on the wrong end of power, but another thing altogether to side with the ones who wield it, consequences be damned.
