---
title: "In Search of Kanye"
description: "In Search of Kanye This is the line for people with Twitter” was the explanation I got outside Webster Hall. It was to be West’s first stateside performance of songs from his latest record, “The Life ..."
date: "2016-06-06"
author: "Matthew Trammell"
source: "New Yorker"
summary: "In Search of Kanye This is the line for people with Twitter” was the explanation I got outside Webster Hall. It was to be West’s first stateside performance of songs from his latest record, “The Life of Pablo.” There was one online whisper, then another, then a shaky, ephemeral Snapchat video from the rapper 2 Chainz. Security wouldn’t confirm, deny, or explain whether tickets were for sale."
draft: false
---

# In Search of Kanye

This is the line for people with Twitter” was the explanation I got outside Webster Hall around 11:30 last night. Like hundreds (and, soon, thousands) of fans, I had headed toward Manhattan instinctively after a tweet from Kanye West’s close collaborator Virgil Abloh had announced a concert by Kanye to make up for a rained-out set that was meant to take place at the Governors Ball earlier that evening. It was to be West’s first stateside performance of songs from his latest record, “The Life of Pablo.”­ He would perform the album at 2 a.m., in Manhattan; he and his team were “sorting out where now.”

There was one online whisper, then another, then a shaky, ephemeral Snapchat video from the rapper 2 Chainz, and by midnight Webster Hall was all but confirmed as the venue. Fans showed up in droves, sprinting and skating down the sidewalk to join the line as quickly as possible, self-policing against cutting, and angling for every inch as they snaked along three blocks. Security wouldn’t confirm, deny, or explain whether tickets were for sale or free. “I don’t know what’s going to happen,” one guard offered a young woman pleading for hints. “But, if I wanted to see what was going to happen, I’d go get in that line right now.” Once in position, defense mechanisms set in among those in line. “What are you waiting here for?” was the common question; a dodgy, shifty-eyed non-answer was the most that many passersby could expect in return. “Someone needs to post another location online to stop people from coming,” one friend plotted with another. “I’m going to tweet, ‘Whoa, no line at Webster. Where the hell is this Kanye show?’” Some hopefuls had travelled from other states to attend the cancelled music festival, while others simply refreshed their Twitter timelines at the right second and had their cabs turn around. Pacts were made, positions were bartered, and a certain pattern of clothing became a marker in a line with no end in sight.

A few blocks away, a cluster of West associates, rap brats, club kids, and Parisian models were dancing to Tears for Fears and MGMT at a private pre-party for the not-yet-confirmed-but-totally-happening surprise performance. The crowd was intimate and familiar, bouncing among tables and grabbing the mic for impromptu monologues; unreleased songs from the G.O.O.D. Music vault were tested among friends. Jameson and Patrón eased tensions and massaged egos, but the air still held an electric unease: the crowd back at Webster Hall was surely growing with every second spent bopping to tunes spun by Abloh and his cohorts. Folks juggled text threads with friends on location as passes and plugs were handed off. At around 1:15 a.m., in the middle of Thundercat’s “Them Changes,” the system cut out, and the d.j.s whisked themselves into Uber S.U.V.s and blitzed toward the scrum. The rest knew to follow.

By 1:30, what had started as a triple-file line had swelled into an immobile and enthused throng that was choking Eleventh Street at both curbs. The scene resembled a ticker-tape parade with no Commissioner’s Trophy, a Times Square ball drop in June, a blackout with all the power still on. The crowd was restless but peaceful, looking for any glimmer of assurance that West would arrive. Police officers cased the block diligently, and security seemed vexed to work overtime at a rapper’s whim, but even those in uniform seemed to want a show.

The block-wide din outside made the hush of the empty Grand Ballroom inside Webster Hall seem even more ominous. The venue was certainly prepared for a concert: keyboards and monitors lined the stage under a massive flat-screen with images of deep gray storm clouds on continuous loop. Most of the pre-party posse had entered without much trouble, along with West’s backing musicians and several G.O.O.D Music recording artists. A handful of nimble fans stowed away in stairwells from a previous show, determined to wait it out. Bartenders served drinks and bathroom attendants offered towels, on duty until they were told otherwise. With no lines at the merch booth, a lucky few stocked up on coveted West T-shirts designed exclusively for the evening’s show: “In town for a day,” the back of one tan shirt read. “What the fuck we doing?”

Soon fans would realize that getting into Webster Hall was no longer the problem. Dozens of N.Y.P.D. officers swept the building, deliberately but respectfully. The concert had officially been cancelled, they announced; however, with the crush of thousands clogging every exit, there was no way out of the venue — it would be at least another hour before they could clear the street. Stagehands began disassembling equipment set up just a few moments before. “Tell Kanye he needs to come back!” a venue staffer teased his entourage. “Man, a Kanye show ain’t cheap!” one guard cracked.

But, outside, the crowd got to see West for free — he arrived in a black Mercedes Benz and made his way through the immense crowd in the vehicle, shaking hands from the sunroof and shouting raps past the Webster marquee and down Third Avenue, with hundreds of fans chasing behind. After a cancelled festival performance and three hours waiting in the street on blind faith, the kids in the crowd had earned a show, and the jolt of West’s presence reawakened the endless possibilities of a city that had been temporarily seized by a rapper. “I need you to call the Mayor and shut down the block for about four streets, and then try to put some screens up so they can have a party outside,” West was filmed saying into his iPhone prior to his arrival — who he was delegating to wasn’t specified. Police officers were in good spirits, despite a string of rap concerts cancelled in New York in the previous week, following an anomalous shooting at Irving Plaza last month. “I’m from New York; I grew up on Run-D.M.C.,” one officer said between his radio’s chirps. “Even Eric B. & Rakim, they weren’t really talking about committing crimes. I know rap isn’t violent. The kids outside just want to see a show,” he continued, before being pulled back into his radio communications.

The Webster Hall doors finally opened shortly after 3 a.m., and we slinked back into the night air, laughing for lack of any other reaction. The crowds hadn’t so much cleared as unravelled across the Village, impossible to miss in neat sportswear and thick chokers. West was still in the city, so they were, too, on deck for the next call to action. Stray hints gathered from phones splintered the groups: there would be a d.j. set at 1OAK, in the Meatpacking District; no, a G.O.O.D Music takeover at S.O.B.’s; no, a pop-up — the pop-up — down the street, at the Trump Soho. Cabs became Sixth Avenue shuttles, their drivers amused by the evening’s chase after Mr. West, the biggest name in town. “I saw him with his entourage. His car was right next to my car,” one driver boasted at around 4 a.m. “It goes to show how good celebrities have it, man. He’s just a regular guy! But talent: they get clothes for free, they get [women] for free — they get drivers for free!” He laughed. “I hope we all get to live like that one day.”
