---
title: "Kanye West’s Relentless Enthusiasms"
description: "Kanye West is adept at making idiosyncratic records. He has dominated 2010 by doing so many different things that it feels almost naive to discuss him as a recording artist. The murky, pixillated West..."
date: "2010-12-06"
author: "Sasha Frer-Jones"
source: "The New Yorker"
summary: "Kanye West is adept at making idiosyncratic records. He has dominated 2010 by doing so many different things that it feels almost naive to discuss him as a recording artist. The murky, pixillated West who did live interviews on the Internet."
draft: false
---

# Kanye West’s Relentless Enthusiasms

Does Kanye West need to be any good? Although West is adept at making idiosyncratic records, he has dominated 2010 by doing so many different things that it feels almost naive to discuss him as a recording artist. Which Kanye did you follow this year? The newcomer to Twitter, who liked to talk about expensive chairs and Mark Rothko, and sometimes tags his tweets “Greatesttweetofalltime”? The murky, pixillated West who did live interviews on the Internet, and came across as a self-deprecating character who seemed most concerned with answering questions accurately? The strange public figure who served as a foil for both Taylor Swift and George W. Bush? West’s new record, “My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy,” is just one version of the contemporary Kanye, especially since he has already released different versions of some of the album’s songs on the Internet, free. It runs on its own indulgences, converting the improbable and unedited into something transfixing, and becoming about as lusty as pop gets.

West began his career as a hip-hop producer who sped up classic soul samples and cracked wise. His beat for Talib Kweli’s “Get By” is a model of propulsion — a Nina Simone sample turns into a frantic game of patty-cake, with claps, piano arpeggios, and a bass line all racing to outdo the rappers. He seemed like a brilliant truant, the kid who cut class to sneak out and impress his friends with his comic routines. But his work ethic has always been impressive, and the aspirational side of him is specific, and fierce, even within hip-hop, a genre that isn’t shy about equating success with money. “Kon the Louis Vuitton Don,” one of West’s early mix tapes, was part of a transformation from the man who provided Jay-Z and Mos Def with beats to the one who wanted to out-rap his clients. The shift has been partly successful.

His role as a musician feels like that of a buyer of rare rugs: he has very particular, often exquisite taste. He doesn’t have the vocal instrument of such verifiable greats as Method Man (broad and raspy), Lil Wayne (curling and shape-shifting), or E-40 (deep and liquid), but he makes the most of his and his collaborators’ talents. Often, West simply figures out how to be funny, or, increasingly, just says what he’s thinking, as if he were losing interest in the idea of music itself and were instead finding as many ways as possible to tell you about himself.

What makes West more energizing than annoying is his relentless enthusiasm. Ego is an irrelevant topic for almost any pop star and, as vast as West’s is, his motivations can’t be rooted in self-interest alone, given that he often does a spectacularly bad job of managing his public image. When he jumped onstage at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards to interrupt Swift and lodge his vote for Beyonce, it was a little vial of Kanyeness: though he seemed completely unaware that the awards were not his personal show, he was also manifesting a heartfelt expression of support for another artist.

Kanye has artistic Tourette’s, and, in a world where young pop stars like Justin Bieber are ready for prime-time interviews before they’ve hit puberty, West’s unmanageability is a gift. His sins are usually only offenses to the gods of etiquette — and they are almost always entertaining. They’re also, occasionally, valuable. George Bush may or may not care about black people, but West’s outburst in the aftermath of Katrina was a genuinely political act. A population was being ignored, and benefits and tributes may not have had as much effect as West’s pointed reduction of the situation. If we let him blurt, lunge, and embarrass himself, we might just come out ahead, even if he has to go into hiding for a month or so afterward.

“My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy” is a grandiose, expensive effort, a sweep through the aisles with an overloaded cart that only someone with Kanye West’s charisma and wealth can afford. Notably, there are the guest rappers: the manic Nicki Minaj, who won BET’s 2010 award for best new artist before releasing a record; Jay-Z, the paterfamilias who gave West the opportunities that made him a star; and mainstream rappers such as Rick Ross, who is entertaining and completely familiar. These days, West often surprises us by choosing not to be surprising. If something works, he will re-create it, or sample it, or appropriate it.

“Lost in the World,” the album’s twelfth song, is the inverse, roughly, of hiring a top-ten rapper. Here the singer Justin Vernon, better known as Bon Iver, delivers and embellishes parts of his own composition “Woods,” a murmuring, almost a-capella track about building a whiskey still. West lays Vernon’s silvery vocal over a splintered, insistent beat and transforms it into a devotional investigation of being lost. A very long sample of Gil Scott-Heron forms “Who Will Survive in America?,” the song that comes after “Lost in the Woods” and acts as its coda. Scott-Heron talks about “a rapist known as freedom,” and then describes the state of his race, and of his country. In less than six minutes, West moves from a loner in the woods to his own isolation and on to the entire African-American experience. Good luck figuring out what kind of music this is, though it does contain rapping. West’s music is born of hip-hop, but it now includes so many varieties that it feels most accurate to call it simply Kanye.

The track that embodies the album’s restless hunger and ambition is “Runaway.” The song also anchors a thirty-minute video, which excerpts many of the album’s other offerings, and features a human-bird hybrid girlfriend, a dinner party (awkward, of course) with ballet dancers, and some explosions. The motif is a slow series of sustained descending half and whole notes played on the piano. The beat is aggressive, as are most of the album’s rhythms, though it seems deceptively gentle much of the time. There is a low synthesizer throb that is felt as much as heard, snatches of someone shouting “Who gotcha?,” and then a chorus of voices, one of which is West’s. It’s a mournful sing-along that turns out to be a roast of West: “Let’s have a toast for the douchebags / Let’s have a toast for the assholes.” There is no doubt that he means himself, as he wanders in and out of rapping and singing, always finding “something wrong,” and apologizing to someone who’s been putting up with him for “way too long.” The song disintegrates, and then West comes back, telling a woman to “run away from me, baby.”

When the track returns in full, Pusha-T, of Clipse, is the guest rapper, and he doesn’t feel obliged to stick to West’s script. (He raps about his watch.) Then West reverts to singing about his own failings. All of this is done over a soundtrack that has grown a string section and sounds like the theme for a period movie. There follows a long passage of what appears to be a guitar solo but is actually West singing through a software effect. It’s nine minutes, stem to stern, and about as loopy as entertainment can be before it becomes news. Be glad that West can’t tell the difference, and probably doesn’t want to learn.
