---
title: "About Kanye’s Croissant"
description: "Kanye West rubbed his more-now mentality against the dainty crescent of French foodstuff. Aydelotte: \"you are not a man to be satisfied with pre-made croissants from the rhyming couplet\"..."
date: "2013-09-12"
author: "Emily Greenhouse"
source: "New Yorker‌"
summary: "Kanye West rubbed his more-now mentality against the dainty crescent of French foodstuff. Aydelotte: \"you are not a man to be satisfied with pre-made croissants from the rhyming couplet\""
draft: false
---

# About Kanye’s Croissant

It was only three years ago that French cuisine was added to the unesco list of “world intangible heritage,” and already the gastronomic tradition finds itself under serious attack. Freedom fries are nothing compared to these horreurs. Horsemeat has turned up at the dinner table (and not the “dark, sweet, gamey” variety that Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, believes Parisians enjoy). Some three out of every four French restaurants serve “boil in a bag” dishes—industrially cooked platters that are reheated in individual portions—pretending that fine plating is all the preparation required. The typical Frenchman, who scarfed more than three baguettes a day in 1900, then slowed to one in 1970, now puts away a mere half baguette daily. And, as of August, French consumers are turning more to fast food than to classically styled restaurants. (Long past are the days when France’s McDonald’s recommended that patrons limit their visits to one a week.) The threats to propriety and excellence—to the very “intangible” roots of Gaul—know no bounds.

To add insult to injury, Kanye West—who avows, “I understand culture. I am the nucleus,” and who set up shop in Paris because there “you can just trip on inspiration—here are so many people here who dedicate their lives to excellence”—deigned to command, on his newest album, “In a French-ass restaurant / Hurry up with my damn croissants!” (The track, off “Yeezus,” is called “I am A God.”) He rubbed his more-now mentality against the dainty crescent of French foodstuff, and what could the Internet public do but immediately turn it into meme?

The humor was not as obvious across the Atlantic. Recently, the Association of French Bakers issued an open letter to “Monsieur Kanye West,” signed by Bernard Aydelotte on behalf of “bakers across France, many of whom have taken great offense at this particular rhyming couplet.” Aydelotte writes:

Certainly, you are not a man to be satisfied with pre-made croissants from the baked goods case reheated and tossed out on a small platter. No—you had demanded your croissants freshly baked, to be delivered to your table straight out of the oven piping hot.

And it was with great joy you ordered croissants—not crêpes or brioches—because only croissants can proudly claim that exquisite combination of flaky crust and a succulent center. The croissant is dignified—not vulgar like a piece of toast, simply popped into a mechanical device to be browned. No—the croissant is born of tender care and craftsmanship. Bakers must carefully layer the dough, paint on perfect proportions of butter, and then roll and fold this trembling croissant embryo with the precision of a Japanese origami master.

This process, as you can understand, takes much time.

Celebrating Kanye’s interest in French life style—Aydelotte points out the “frequent references to ménage” (from a remix of his biggest Paris track: “Parlez vous français I say / Ménage à trois today I say”)—he suggests that M. West may know the French dictum “A great croissant is worth waiting a lifetime for.” He closes with a shout-out from a baker in Le Havre, Normandy: “He wants you to know that he loves ‘Black Skinhead.’ ”

I learned of the syndicate’s letter on Facebook, where a number of amused friends posted it, but various sources, taken by the gravity of the tone, have spread it around. “No, this is not a joke,” one blog noted, and, “yes, it’s well worth the three minute read.” And, yet, a French-language version of the hotheaded letter doesn’t seem to exist—plus, what self-respecting baker would, in his opening congratulations, refer to Kimye’s infant daughter (named North) as Nord? The address of the association doesn’t even hold up (listed on the heading sans arrondissements—far worse than leaving out a Zip Code). Blogs scoffed at the unlikely building number—surely higher than Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann, who planned the city under Napoleon III’s Second Empire, would have allowed (“900 (oui, 900)”)!

But, with the Internet being the Internet, it was nearly impossible to say for certain that the letter was a joke. I dug around, and became quite confused along the way (Time, USA Today, the National Post, NBC, Billboard, and more reported on the letter). But, at last, I found, on the blog Medium, the original letter—a spoof, by the Tokyo-based writer W. David Marx. I wrote to Marx, demanding proof of origin. He, scribbling away on a cultural history of American menswear in Japan, responded from Tokyo to explain that, as a former Harvard Lampoon-ist, the satire came naturally as soon as he listened to “Yeezus.” He doesn’t even speak French, he told me; the address (the street name, at least), is that of an APC store in Paris.

Marx submitted the piece for publication but didn’t receive a response, so he found a home for it on Medium, where it was published, on August 13th, and read by thousands. Then, later in the month, the piece was printed without his byline, by the Consumerist and the Hollywood Reporter. It took on a life of its own: Marx told me that some readers insisted on the veracity of the Association of French Bakers, and still some Web sites seem unconcerned with the fraudulence. At one point, Marx threw up his hands, tweeting, “Despite my earnest pleadings that I wrote that open letter to Kanye West, news websites have fact checked it. Turns out, it’s totally real.” At least he got some good publicity from it all?

As this episode shows, it’s too easy for us to paint the French in broad, impressionistic strokes—and then ridicule them. Maureen Dowd, while in Paris for fashion week, earlier this summer, lamented the national mood. Unemployment figures are up, Dépardieu has fled Gallic coasts on account of burdensome taxes, globalization is wreaking havoc, and national glory seems a thing of the past. The leisure class are not even “going anymore on holiday to Egypt,” and fashionably pouty pessimism and long cigarettes have turned into S.S.R.I.-popping despair. Her colleague Roger Cohen remarked days later that surliness and misery are something like the spirit of the Frenchman. He wrote, “malaise and ennui are to France what can-do is to America: A badge of honor.”

The French find this kind of coverage hilarious; a recent Slate.fr article—part of a series called “Le Malaise Français”—wondered why the Times is so obsessed with a supposed crisis of sad, depressed, moping cynics. “Why,” the journalist Cécile Dehesdin asked her epistolary interlocutor, Matt Yglesias, “are you worrying yourselves about us? Why don’t we publish columns to say that Americans are enthusiastic and false, and that it’s infuriating?”

Are matters truly so dispiriting on the French côté that this stodgy and egregiously self-serious letter might be plausible? C’est possible. One look around New York, though, where master bakers and brands like La Durée, François Payard, and Eric Kayser are setting up shop left and right, and it becomes clear that certain Frenchmen have more entrepreneurial know-how than we would like to admit. The grand prix on this front goes, without a doubt, to Dominique Ansel—inventor of le cronut, the summer’s luxury treat—who’s taking our grumbling tummies all the way to the bank. Ansel’s probably not the only French baker today who’s having the last laugh.
